# Control Structures

## Introduction

Control structures in R allow you to control the flow of execution of the program,
depending on runtime conditions. Common structures are

* `if, else`: testing a conditions

* `for`: execute a loop a fixed number of times

* `while`: execute a loop while a condition is true

* `repeat`: execute an infinite loop

* `next`: skip an interation of a loop

* `return`: exit a function

Most control structures are not used in interactive sessions, but rather when 
writting functions or longer expressions.

## if-else 

**if**

```
if(<condition>) {
	## do something
} else {
	## do something
}

if(<condition>) {
	## do something
} else if(<condition2>)	{
	## do something different
} else {
	## do something different
}
```

Of course, the else clause is not necessary.

```
if(<condition>) {

} 

if(<condition2>) {

}
```

## for loops

**for**

`for` loops take an interator variable and assign it successive values from a sequence or vector.
For loops are most commonly used for iterating over the elements of an object (list, vector, etc.).

```
for (i in 1:10) {
	print(i)
}
```

This loop takes the `i` variable and in each iteration of the loop gives it values 1, 2, 3,..., 10, 
and then exits.

**Nested for loops**

`for` loops can be nested.

```
x <- matrix(1:6, 2, 3)

for (i in seq_len(nrow(x))) {
	for (j in seq_len(ncol(x))) {
		print(x[i,j])
	}
}
```

Be careful with nesting though. Nesting beyond 2-3 levels is ofen very difficult to read/understand.

## while loops

**while**

While loops begin by testing a condition. If it is true, then they execute the loop body. Once the 
loop body is executed, the condition is tested again, and so forth.

```
count <- 0
while (count < 10) {
	print(count)
	count <- count +1
}
```

While loops can potentially result in infinite loops if not written properly. Use with care!

Sometimes there will be more than on condition in the test. Conditions are always evaluated from left to right.

## repeat, next, break

**repeat**

Repeat initiates an infinite loop; there are not commonly used in statistical applications but they do have their
uses. The only way to exit a `repeat` loop is to call `break`.

```
x0 <- 1
tol <- 1e-8

repeat {
	x1 <- computeEstimate()
	
	if (abs(x1 - x0) < tol) {
		break
	} else {
		x0 <- x1
	}
}
```

The loop in the previous is a bit dangerous because there is no guarantee it will stop.
Better to set a hard limit on the number of iterations (e.g. using a for loop) and then 
report whether convergence was achieved or not.

**next, return**

`next` is used to skip an iteration of a loop

```
for (i in 1:100) {
	if (i <= 20) {
		## Skip the first 20 iterations
		next
	}
	## Do something here
}		
```

`return` signals that a function should exit and return a given value.

## Summary

* Control structures like `if`, `while`, and `for` allow you to control the flow of an R program.

* Infinite loops should generally be avoided, even if they are theoretically correct.

* Control structures mentioned here are primarily useful for writting program; for command-line
interactive work, the *apply function are more useful. 

# Functions

## Functions

**Functions**

Functions are created using the `function()` directive and are stored as R objects just like anything
else. In particular, they are R objects of class "function". 

```
f <- function(<arguments>) {
	## Do something interesting
}
```

Functions in R are "first class objects", which means that they can be treated much like any other R
object. Importantly,

* Functions can be passed as arguments to other functions

*Functions can be nested, so that you can define a function inside of another function. The return value
of a function is the last expression in the function body to be evaluated.

**Function Arguments**

Functions have named arguments which potentially have default values.

* The formal arguments are the arguments included in the function definition

* The `formals` function returns a list of all the formal arguments of a function

* Not every function call in R makes use of all the formal arguments

* Function arguments can be missing or might have default values

**Argument Matching**

R functions arguments can be matched positionally or by name. So the following calls to `sd` are all equivalent

```
> mydata <- rnorm(100)
> sd(mydata)
> sd(x = mydata)
> sd(x = mydata, na.rm = FALSE)
> sd(na.rm = FALSE, x = mydata)
> sd(na.rm = FALSE, mydata)
```

Even though it is legal. I do not recommend messing around with the order of the arguments too much, since it can
lead to some confusion.

You can mix positional matching with matching by name. When an argument is matched by name, it is "taken out" of the
argument list and the remaining unnamed arguments are matched in the order that they are listed in the function definition.

* Most of the time, named arguments are useful on the command line when you have a long argument list and you want to use
the defaults for everything except for an argument near the end of the list

* Named arguments also help if you can remember the name of the argument and not its position on the argument list (plotting
is a good example)

Function arguments can also be partially matched, which is useful for interactive work. The order of operations when given an
argument is 

1. Check for exact match for a named argument

2. Check for a partial match

3. Check for a positional match

**Definition a Function**

```
f <- function(a, b = 1, c = 2, d = NULL) {

}
```

In addition to not specifying a default value, you can also set an argument value to `NULL`.

**Lazy Evaluation**

Arguments to functions are evaluated lazily, so they are evaluated only as needed.

```
f <- function(a, b) {
	a^2
}
f(2)

## [1] 4
```

This function never actually uses the argument `b`, so calling `f(2)` will not produce an error because
the 2 gets positionally matched to `a`.

**The "..." Argument**

The ... argument indicate a variable number of arguments that are usually passed on to other functions.

* ... is often used when extending another function and you do not want to copy the entire argument list 
of the original function

```
myplot <- function(x, y, type = "1", ...) {
	plot(x, y, type = type, ...)
}
```

* Generic functions use ... so that extra arguments can be passed to methods (more on this later).

```
> mean
function (x, ...)
UseMethod('mean')
```

The ... argument is also necessary when the number of arguments passed to the function cannot be known
in advance.

```
> args(paste)
function (..., sep = " ", collapse = NULL)

> args(cat)
function (..., file = "", sep = " ", fill = FALSE, labels= NULL, append = FALSE)
```

## Scoping Rules

**A Diversion on Binding Values to Symbol**

When R tries to bind a value to a symbol, it searches through a series of `environments`
to find the appropriate value. When you are working on the command line and need to retrieve
the value of an R object, the order is roughly

1. Search the global environment for a symbol name matching the one requested.

2. Search the namespaces of each of the packages on the search list.

The search list can be found by using the `search` function.

**Binding Values to Symbol**

* The global environment or the user's workspace is always the first element of 
the search list and the base package is always the last.

* The order of the packages on the search list matters!

* User's can configure which packages get loaded on startup so you can not assume
that there will be a set list of packages available.

* When a user loads a package with `library` the namespace of that package gets put
in position 2 of the search list (by default) and everything else gets shifted down the list.

* Note that R has separate namespaces for functions and non-functions so it is possible to 
have an object name c and a function named c.

**Scoping Rules**

The scoping rules for R are the main feature that make it different from the original S language.

* The scoping rules determine how a value is associated with a free variable in a function

* R uses lexical scoping or static scoping. A common alternative is dynamic scoping

* Related to the scoping rules is how R uses the search list to bind a value to a symbol

* Lexical scoping turns out to be particularly useful for simplifying statistical computations

**Lexical Scoping**

Consider the following function

```
f <- function(x, y) {
	x^2 + y / z
}
```

This function has 2 formal arguments `x` and `y`. In the body of the function there is another
symbol `z`. In this case `z` is called a free variable. The scoping rules of a language determine
how values are assigned to free variables. Free variables are not formal arguments and are not 
local variables (assigned insided the function body).

Lexical scoping in R means that the values of free variables are searched for in the environment
in which the function was defined.

What is an environment?

* An environment is a collection of (symbol, value) pairs, i.e. `x` is a symbol and `3.14`
might be its value.

* Every environment has a parent environment; it is possible for an environment to have
multiple "children".

* The only environment without a parent is the empty environment.

* A function + an environment = a closure or function closure.

Searching for the value for a free variable:

* If the valu of a symbol is not found in the environment in which a function was defined,
then the search is continued in the parent environment.

* The search continues down the sequence of parent environments until we hit the top-levels
environment; thi usually the global environment (workspace) or the namespace of a package.

* After the top-level environment, the search continues down the search list until we hit
the empty environment. If a value for a given symbol cannot be found once the empty environment
is arrived at, then an error is thrown.




























































